Taking the Vows of Sojong
by Śākyaśrībhadra

In the language of India: poṣadhakaraṇīya
In the language of Tibet: gso sbyong blang ba

Homage to noble Amoghapāśa!

sangye chö dang tsok chok la
In the Buddha, Dharma and supreme assembly,
changchub bardu dak kyab chi
I take refuge until I attain awakening!
dak dang shyendön rab drub chir
In order to secure my own and others’ welfare,
changchub sem di kyepar gyi
I generate the spirit of awakening!

dikpa tamché shak gyi ching
All my misdeeds I hereby confess,
sönam la yang jé yi rang
And I rejoice in all that is meritorious.
pakpé sojong yenlak gyé
The eight branches of noble sojong (healing and purification),
nyenpa la ni chepar gyi’o
I now take on and uphold!

chomden dak la gong su sol
Blessed one, turn your attention toward me, I pray!
dak ming di shyé gyiwa ni
I, the one called insert your name here,
dü di né zung jisi né
From this moment on,
nyimé ö ni mashar bar
Until the light of the sun appears,
sokchak sö dang shyen nor trok
Shall wholly renounce
mi tsangchö dang den min ma
Taking life, stealing others’ possessions,
nyöpa kyé dang shyönpa dang
Sexual misconduct, speaking falsity,
dü ni mayinpa yi zé
Inebriation, conveyances,
trengwa khadok lu dang gar
Meals at improper times,
tri ten tönpo la sokpa
Colourful garlands, singing and dancing,
tamché dak gi pang gyi ching
High seats and the like.
pakpé yönten gyé ché dang
I take on the eight qualities of the noble ones
sojong trim dom yidam di
And this pledge and commitment to the rules of sojong,
sem kyi gyen sem kyi yojé naljor gyi tsok chok tu döndampé sangye nyi
I take this as an ornament of mind, a mental requirement—through this light,
tobpa la ni ö di rek gyur chik
May I reach ultimate buddhahood in the supreme assembly of practitioners!
changchub chok gi sem di kyé gyi la
I generate this mind set upon supreme awakening,
semchen tamché dak gi drön du nyer
And invite all sentient beings as my guests.
changchub chö chok yi ong ché né ni
Having practised supreme, delightful enlightened action,
dro la pen chir sangye drubpar shok
May I attain enlightenment in order to benefit beings!

This text, composed the great Kashmiri paṇḍita Śākyaśrībhadra, is hereby concluded.
Translated by the lotsāwa-monk Rabchok Palzangpo.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019.