The Blissful Path of Action Tantra
A Ritual for Taking the One-Day Vows of a Lay Practitioner
by Jigme Lingpa

Should you wish to perform a very brief ritual for taking the vows of a lay practitioner,1 rise
at daybreak, wash, then take refuge:
Refuge
pakpé tuk ni sangye té
The mind of the Noble One is the Buddha,
sung ni damchö ku gendün
His speech, the sacred Dharma, and his body, the saṅgha—
gangla kyab chi semchen dön
I take refuge in you; for the sake of sentient beings
tsemé shyi gom khyö drubja
I shall meditate on the four immeasurables and become just like you.
If you are familiar with it, recite the verse that begins, ‘May all sentient beings enjoy happiness…’:
semchen tamché dewa dang dewé gyu dang denpar gyur chik
May all sentient beings enjoy happiness, and the causes of happiness,
dukngal dang dukngal gyi gyu dang dralwar gyur chik
Be free from suffering, and the causes of suffering,
dukngal mepé dewa dampa dang midralwar gyur chik
May they never be separated from the great happiness devoid of suffering,
nyering chakdang nyi dang dralwé tangnyom tsemepa la nepar gyur chik
And may they dwell in the great equanimity that is free from attachment and aversion.
Taking the Vows
Then, take the vows:
sangye pakpa gong su sol
Noble Buddha, turn your attention towards me!
deng né nyatong gyé nam su
From now on, on the eighth and full and new moon days,2
sokchö ku dang mitsangchö
I shall abandon killing, stealing, sexual misconduct,
dzün dang chang dang lugar gyen
Lying, intoxicants; singing, dancing and wearing jewellery;
tri ten to dang chidrö zé
Sitting on high seats and eating after midday—
pang té yenlak gyepa sung
These eight branches I shall maintain.
nyönmong dra dé jompar shok
May the enemies of destructive emotions be destroyed!
Recite this three times.
The Visualization
Then, generate the front visualization:
om sobhava shuddha sarva dharma sobhava shuddho hang
oṃ svabhāva śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva śuddho ‘haṃ
tongpé ngang lé ri potalé shying
From the state of emptiness appears the pure realm of Mount Potala.
ö nang kyilkhor chukyé da den teng
Within a circle of light, upon lotus and moon-disk seats,
hrih yik yong gyur pakpa jikten wang
Is hrīḥ, which transforms into the Noble Lord of the World,3
kudok karsal nyampé tab kyi shyeng
Brilliant white in colour and standing in the posture of equanimity,
yepa chok jin yönpa pekar chang
With his right hand in the gesture of supreme generosity and his left holding a white lotus.
utra tortsuk zurpü norbü tré
His hair is tied up in a top-knot adorned with a jewel,
ridak krishné shünpé nu ma kab
His breast covered with a blackbuck4 skin.
kashi shamtab ta zur yön du tri
His lower garment, from Vārāṇasī,5 is bound at his left hip.
shyi tsul guden nyencha dubü dzé
Expressing the nine peaceful demeanours, he is adorned with earrings and bodily jewellery.6
changchub sempé özer künné tro
The bodhisattva’s rays of light shine everywhere.
sangye changsem rigdzin drangsong kor
He is surrounded by buddhas, bodhisattvas, vidyādharas and sages,7
detar salwé né sum yikdru lé
All appearing clearly with light radiating from the seed syllables at their three places
rang dré yeshe sempa chendrang tim
To invoke the wisdom beings, similar in appearance, who then dissolve into the visualized forms.
The Invitation
Recite the verses that begin, ‘You are the protector of all beings without exception...’:
malü semchen kün gyi gön gyur ching
You are the protector of all beings without exception,
dü dé pung ché mi zé jom dzé lha
The terrifying, divine destroyer of Māra’s armies,
ngö nam malü jishyin khyen gyurpé
And you know all things exactly as they are—
chomden khor ché né dir shek su sol
Blessed One, together with your retinue, please come here!
Offerings
Recite the seven-branch prayer beginning with “To all the buddhas, the lions of the human race”8
Then offer a maṇḍala, either elaborately or concisely.
Taking the Bodhisattva Vows
dzokpé sangye gang shyuk dang
All you buddhas, wherever you abide,
gangdak dé dang majönpa
Whether in the past or in the future—
dedak jesu dak lob ching
I will train and follow in your footsteps.
changchub chepa chö gyur chik
May I carry out awakened actions.
parol chin druk dzok gyi né
Perfecting the six pāramitās,
dro druk semchen tar gyi shok
May I liberate the six classes of beings!
Recite this three times and strive to accumulate the six-syllable mantra.9
At the end of the session, recite praises such as the one that begins, ‘Oṃ. Protector of the
world...’10
Then confess, dedicate and make aspirations with texts such as The Bodhisattva’s Confession
of Downfalls11 and Samantabhadra’s “Aspiration to Good Actions”.

Written by Khyentse Lha, offspring of the victorious ones.

| Translated by Han Kop and reviewed by Stefan Mang, 2021, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project.
With thanks to Tulku Dawa Zangpo and Khenpo Sonam Tsewang for their clarifications.

Source: 'Jigs med gling pa. "Bsnyen gnas kyi cho ga bya rgyud bde lam", in gSung 'bum/_'Jigs
med gling pa/（sde dge par ma). 9 Vols. BDRC W27300. Gangtok, India: Pema Thinley for Dodrupchen
Rinpoche, 1985. Vol. 8: 736–737
↑ Skt. upāsaka.↑ These are the eighth, fifteenth and thirtieth days of the lunar calendar.↑
Avalokiteśvara.↑ Skt. kṛṣṇamṛga.↑ Vārāṇasī was, and is, famous for its high quality fabrics.↑
Bodily jewellery refers to jewellery worn on the limbs, such as anklets and bracelets.↑
Skt. ṛṣi↑ I.e., the seven-branch prayer from Samantabhadra’s “Aspiration to Good Actions”:
https://www.lotsawahouse.org/words-of-the-buddha/samantabhadra-aspiration-good-actions.↑
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ.↑ The Praise of Noble Avalokiteśvara by Bhikṣuṇī Lakṣmī: https://www.lotsawahouse.org/indian-masters/lakshmi/po-praise-of-avalokiteshvara-chant↑
https://www.lotsawahouse.org/words-of-the-buddha/confession-of-downfalls-nyingma